[Docs][PD][NIXL] Lease extension mechanism for blocks on P (#43099)
vllm-project/vllm: docs/design/kv_cache_lease.md

> # KV Cache Lease Renewal

Reviewer: Should mention NIXL in the title and filename

### Solution: lease renewal via heartbeats

The lease renewal mechanism addresses both problems simultaneously. P grants a **short initial lease** (default 30s) when prefill completes. While a request is **queued or in-flight** on D, D **periodically sends heartbeats** to P extending the lease. If D crashes and stops heartbeating, P reclaims blocks within seconds of the last heartbeat rather than waiting minutes. If D is merely overloaded, the heartbeats keep the blocks alive for as long as needed.

## How It Works

### Lease lifecycle

When P finishes a prefill, it pins the KV blocks with an initial lease duration (`kv_lease_duration`, default 30s). From that point, the blocks are held until either:

1. **D completes the KV transfer** --- P receives a read-completion notification and frees the blocks immediately.
2. **D keeps heartbeating** --- each heartbeat extends the lease by `lease_duration * 2/3` (~20s), keeping blocks alive indefinitely while D is healthy.
3. **No heartbeat arrives** --- the lease expires and P reclaims the blocks.

### Piggybacking on NIXL notifications

> Rather than introducing a new transport channel, heartbeats reuse NIXL's existing notification system (`send_notif` / `get_new_notifs`). The notification medium is backend-specific, with automatic fallback from IB/RoCE to TCP already handled by NIXL. **Heartbeat messages group requests on D by destination**, so that a single batched message is sent per-remote, enabling lease renewal of multiple request per timestep.

Reviewer: I find "group requests on D by destination" a bit hard to parse, but not sure my version is better!

```suggestion
Rather than introducing a new transport channel, heartbeats reuse NIXL's existing notification system (`send_notif` / `get_new_notifs`). The notification medium is backend-specific, with automatic fallback from IB/RoCE to TCP already handled by NIXL. Each single heartbeat message sent from D to a particular P renews all requests pinned in P on behalf of that D - in other words, a single batched message per iteration renews the lease of multiple requests.
```
